# *Problem*: Artifacts

ISO 32000 (the specification for PDF) defines **Artifacts** as:

"Content is considered to be artifacts, whether generated by the PDF writer in the course of pagination, layout, or other mechanical processes or introduced by the document author for decoration or other purposes that are not relevant for understanding the content of the document."

## What does this mean?

Simply put, anything inside a PDF document that is unnecessary to understand the meaning of its purpose needs to be separated from the content that does provide meaning. Content that is hidden is called an Artifact.

### What is a **PDF writer**?
A PDF writer is a type of **PDF Processor** that includes "software, hardware or any other active agent that writes, reads, updates or otherwise processes a PDF file **which conforms to this document and does so in a manner that conforms to this document.**" (ISO 32000-2, 3: Terms and Definitions, 3.52.).

Commonly used PDF writers include Microsoft Office, Adobe InDesign, Illustrator, Acrobat or really anything else that creates a PDF that **conforms to ISO 32000**. The part about conforming to 32000 is important, because not all PDF Writers conform to the PDF specification. Some software makers just decide to do their own thing when creating a PDF. By reinventing the wheel, they end up making a remediator's life that much more, um, interesting.

## When should I refer to Artifacts as an Issue?

You'll want to refer to Artifacts as an issue whenever you're having problems with content that should be hidden, or is hidden yet shouldn't be. Use this *Problem* when referring to any content that isn't [Real Content](Problems/Real-content.md). 
